Study Guide Chapter 21- Name the four stages of food processing.- 1. ingestion- act of eating  2.digestion - breaking down of food, Mechanically- chewing  Chemically- hydrolysis 3. absorption 4. elimination- buffers that neutralize acids,- the salivary enzyme amylase that begins the hydrolysis of starch, and- antibacterial agents that kill some bacteria ingested with food.- Define:- Peristalsis- Alternating contraction and relaxation of the muscles that moves the food along- Sphincters- Muscular valves regulate the food in and out of the stomach- Does the tongue have a function in digestion?  If so what is its function?- Tongue pushes food into the pharynx- Bolus can be described as- The toungue shaping the food into a bolus (ball)- Distinguish between the larynx and epiglottis.- During swallowing, the tip of the larynx, a door-like flap of cartilage called the epiglottis, moves upward, preventing the food from entering the trachea.- - - Describe the following or give a description of following in regards to the stomach.- 1.	pH- is about 2- 2.	digestive juices- 3.	parietal cells- Form HCI (hydrochloric acid)- 4.	pepsinogen- pepsinogen and HCI from active pepsin- 5.	HCL- Hydrochloric acid, HCI converts pepsinogen to pepsin- 6.	Pepsin- breaks down the proteins- 7.	Gastrin- hormone that stimulates the secretion of gastric juice- 8.	Chyme- result of enzyme, gastric juices and ready to enter the small intestine.- 9.	Hours food is in the stomach- 2-6 hrs- 10.	Acid reflex-backflow of chime into the esophagus (heartburn)- 11.	H.Pyloric- a bacteria found in 70 to 90% of ulcer patients- What is the purpose of the pancreas?- produces pancreatic juice (insulin) enzymes and bicarbonate- bicarbonate is a buffer to alkalize acidity of the chyme- What are the functions of the liver?- produces bile- bile emulsifies ( breaks up fats into small droplets) fats bile is stored in the gall  bladder- bile mixes with chyme in the duodenum- Where is bile stored and what is its function.- The bile is stored in the gallbladder and its function is Bile breaks up fats into small droplets that are more susceptible to attack by digestive enzymes.- Which molecules are digested in the small intestine?- carbohydrates, proteins, nucleic acids and fats are digested in- Describe villi.  Where are they found and what is their function?- on inner wall are small fingerlike projections called villi. Villi Have microvilli which increase the surface area for absorption of nutrients- Answer the following regarding the colon and how they relate to the colon.- Colon bacteria? colon bacteria- E.Coli produce vitamins.- 1.	Cecum- Blind pouch which has the appendix. Collects water from the small intestine and passes it to the large intestine.- 2.	Rectum- Final storage area- 3.	Appendix- Contains white cells- Describe or state their function.- 1.	Trypsin- Enzyme that breaks down polypeptides.- 2.	Chymotrypsin- alongside with trypsin enzyme breaks down polypeptides- 3.	Nuclease- breaks down nucleic acid- 4.	Aminopeptidase- Breaks down amino acids- 5.	Pancreatic amylase- breaks down starches- 6.	Hepatic portal vein- Conducts blood from the gastrointestinal tract and spleen to the liver.- 7.	Vitamins- Organic nutrients required in min amounts- 8.	Minerals-inorganic nutrients required in small amounts- 9.	LDL- Low density lipoproteins may cause heart attacks, high blood pressure, etc (molecules of cholesterol , lipids and proteins)- 10.	HDL- High density lipoproteins, lowers risk of cardiovascular disease.- - Where does the largest amount of water get reabsorbed and how much of the water is reabsorbed?- It gets reabsorbed in the large intestine or the colon.  Just enough to not get diarrhea (too little water) or constipation (too much water)- Where are fats digested?- In the liver- What is salivary amylase?- The sweet taste they may notice is produced by the sugars produced by the chemical breakdown of starch by amylase, a digestive enzyme found in human saliva.- Describe the Heimlich maneuver.- 1)	From behind wrap your arms around the victim.- 2)	Make a fist and place the thumb side of your fist against the victims abdomen, below the rib cage and above the navel.- 3)	Grasp your fist with your other hand and press into the victims abdomen with a quick upward thrust.- 4)	Repeat until object is expelled.